Update Flows reference docs and guide (#281)
pipecat-ai/docs: guides/features/pipecat-flows.mdx

---
title: "Pipecat Flows"
description: "Learn how to create structured conversations using Pipecat's flow system"
---

## What is Pipecat Flows?

Pipecat Flows is an add-on framework for Pipecat that allows you to build structured conversations in your AI applications. It enables you to create both predefined conversation paths and dynamically generated flows while handling the complexities of state management and LLM interactions.

Want to dive right in? Check out these examples:

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Hello World"
    icon="rocket"
    href="https://github.com/pipecat-ai/pipecat-flows/tree/main/examples/quickstart"
  >
    A great first Flow to show you the ropes
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Restaurant Reservation"
    icon="utensils"
    href="https://github.com/pipecat-ai/pipecat-flows/blob/main/examples/dynamic/restaurant_reservation.py"
  >

>     A simple, practical dynamic flow example

Reviewer: If we're de-emphasizing static v dynamic flows (with the latter being the "default" way of doing things), do we need to mention "dynamic" here?

  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## How do Pipecat and Pipecat Flows work together?

**Pipecat** defines the core capabilities of your bot. This includes the pipeline and processors which, at a minimum, enable your bot to:

- Receive audio from a user
- Transcribe the user's input
- Run an LLM completion
- Convert the LLM response to audio
- Send audio back to the user

> **Pipecat Flows** complements Pipecat's core functionality by managing the conversation's context and tools. This is separate from the core pipeline, allowing you to separate the conversation logic from the core pipeline mechanics.

Reviewer: IMO, "managing the conversation's context and tools" kind "undersells" what the framework does. It doesn't say to what end it does those things.

Taking a stab at summarizing:

```suggestion
**Pipecat Flows** complements Pipecat's core functionality by providing a layer of structure to a conversation, managing context and tools as the conversation moves from one state to another. This is separate from the core pipeline, allowing you to separate conversation logic from core pipeline mechanics.
```

## When to Use Pipecat Flows?

Pipecat Flows is best suited for use cases where:

- You require precise control over how a conversation progresses
- Your bot needs to handle a complex task that can be decomposed into discrete steps

> - You're trying to improve the accuracy of your LLM's response or tool use

Reviewer: Not sure I grok this 3rd point. Can you explain?

Reviewer: Ah, you're referring to cases where you might otherwise have a huge prompt and many tools registered at once. I think I understand. The follow sentence makes it clearer.

Reviewer: Yes! Reads great now

Why is this effective? Flows provides a framework for breaking up long or monolithic prompts into discrete steps. This helps your LLM handle the most recent input (i.e. task) one step at a time.

## Selecting a Flows API

Pipecat Flows provides two APIs for how to build your application: Dynamic Flows and Static Flows.

- **Dynamic Flows (recommended)**: When conversation paths need to be determined at runtime based on user input, external data, or business logic.
- **Static Flows**: When your conversation structure is known upfront and follows predefined paths.

> <Note>

Reviewer: 👍

  Dynamic Flows can handle both simple and complex use cases. Selecting it
  provides you with an option that can grow with the complexity of your
  application. For these reasons, we strongly recommend it as the API pattern to
  follow.
</Note>

## Technical Overview

> Pipecat Flows represents a conversation as a graph, where each step of the conversation is represented by a node. Nodes are typed as a `NodeConfig`, which may contain the following properties:

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
Pipecat Flows represents a conversation as a graph, where each step of the conversation is represented by a node. Nodes are of type `NodeConfig`, and may contain the following properties:
```

- `name`: The name of the node; used as a reference to transition to the node

> - `role_messages`: A list of message `dicts` defining the bot's role/personality

Reviewer: Should we mention this should only be used on the first node?

#### Message Format

Messages are specified in OpenAI format as a list of `dicts`:

```python
"role_messages": [
    {
        "role": "system",
        "content": "You are an inquisitive child.",
    }
],
"task_messages": [
    {
        "role": "system",
        "content": "Say 'Hello world' and ask what is the user's favorite color.",
    }
],
```

#### Cross-Provider Compatibility

Pipecat's default message format uses the OpenAI message spec. With this message format, messages are automatically translated by Pipecat to work with your chosen LLM provider, making it easy to switch between OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, and other providers without changing your code.

<Warning>
  Some LLMs, like Anthropic and Gemini, can only set the system instruction at
  initialization time. This means you will only be able to set the
  `role_messages` at initialization for those LLMs.
</Warning>

### Functions

Functions in Pipecat Flows serve two key purposes:

1. **Process data** by interfacing with external systems and APIs to read or write information

> 2. **Navigate the conversation** by transitioning between nodes in your flow

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
2. **Progress the conversation** by transitioning between nodes in your flow
```

    """
    print(f"Your favorite color is: {args['color']}")
    return args["color"], create_end_node()
```

#### Direct Functions

For more concise code, you can optionally use Direct Functions where the function definition and handler are combined in a single function. The function signature and docstring are automatically used to generate the function schema:

```python
async def record_favorite_color(
    flow_manager: FlowManager,
    color: str
) -> tuple[FlowResult, NodeConfig]:
    """
    Record the color the user said is their favorite.

    Args:
        color (str): The user's favorite color
    """
    print(f"Your favorite color is: {args['color']}")
    return args["color"], create_end_node()

# Use directly in NodeConfig
node_config = {
    "functions": [record_favorite_color]
}
```

This approach eliminates the need for separate `FlowsFunctionSchema` definitions while maintaining the same functionality.

#### Handler Return Values

Function handlers must return a tuple containing:

- **Result**: Data provided to the LLM for context in subsequent completions
- **Next Node**: The `NodeConfig` for Flows to transition to next

> Some handlers may not need to return a next node, in which case you can return `None`. Also, some handlers may not need to return a result, in which case you can return `None` for the result as well.

Author: Maybe we should encourage using None only for the case where you want to do work in the node and not transfer. I think you pretty much always want to return a result. I'll make that update.

> Some handlers may not need to return a next node, in which case you can return `None`. Also, some handlers may not need to return a result, in which case you can return `None` for the result as well.

Reviewer: > I think you pretty much always want to return a result

I don't think that's true. We would want to return only a next node and no result in all the cases where we'd previously use a `transition_*` by itself without a `handler`. Fixing.

### Actions

Actions allow you to execute custom functionality at specific points in your conversation flow, giving you precise control over timing and sequencing.

#### Action Types

- `pre_actions` execute immediately when transitioning to a new node, _before_ the LLM inference begins.
- `post_actions` execute after the LLM inference completes and any TTS has finished speaking.

#### Built-in Actions

Pipecat Flows includes several ready-to-use actions for common scenarios:

- **`tts_say`**: Speak a phrase immediately (useful for "please wait" messages)
- **`end_conversation`**: Gracefully terminate the conversation
- **`function`**: Execute a custom function at the specified timing

#### Custom Actions

> You can define your own actions to handle specific business logic or integrations. Custom actions give you complete flexibility to execute any functionality your application needs.

Author: Good point.

    context_aggregator=context_aggregator,  # Context aggregator
    transport=transport,                    # Transport
)
```

Then, initialize by passing the initial `NodeConfig` into the `initialize()` method:

```python
@transport.event_handler("on_client_connected")
async def on_client_connected(transport, client):
    logger.info(f"Client connected")
    # Kick off the conversation.
    await flow_manager.initialize(create_initial_node())
```

### Static Flow

First, create the FlowManager:

```python
flow_manager = FlowManager(
    task=task,                              # PipelineTask
    llm=llm,                                # LLMService
    context_aggregator=context_aggregator,  # Context aggregator
    flow_config=flow_config,                # FlowConfig
)
```

Then initialize:

```python
@transport.event_handler("on_first_participant_joined")
async def on_first_participant_joined(transport, participant):
    await transport.capture_participant_transcription(participant["id"])
    logger.debug("Initializing flow")
    await flow_manager.initialize()
```

<Note>For Static Flows, `initialize()` does not take any args.</Note>

## State Management

> Pipecat Flows includes built-in state management through the `flow_manager.state` dictionary. This persistent storage lets you share data across nodes throughout the entire conversation.

Author: Yeah! Cross-Node State is a great concept. The idea is to make it easier to have state to pass around, avoiding the need for globals.

                "content": "You are an inquisitive child. Use very simple language. Ask simple questions. You must ALWAYS use one of the available functions to progress the conversation. Your responses will be converted to audio. Avoid outputting special characters and emojis.",
            }
        ],
        "task_messages": [
            {
                "role": "system",
                "content": "Say 'Hello world' and ask what is the user's favorite color.",
            }
        ],
        "functions": [record_favorite_color_func],
    }
```

### FlowConfig (Static Flow)

The FlowConfig is a static JSON object that completely defines the entire flow. This follows the same rules as the NodeConfig, but is assembled as a single JSON object that defines the entire state of the program.

The FlowConfig can contain functions that are used to define the function handler behavior that executes when a function call occurs.

See the [food_ordering example](https://github.com/pipecat-ai/pipecat-flows/blob/main/examples/static/food_ordering.py) for an example of the FlowConfig.

### Function Calls

Pipecat Flows supports three ways to define function calls:

> #### FlowsFunctionSchema (Recommended)

Reviewer: As I've been reading this doc and looking at our examples, I'm wondering if/when we should flip to recommending direct functions as the main recommended way of doing things, with function schemas as an alternative if you happen to need more fine-grained control (mainly over the `properties` object). Using functions directly really does cut down boilerplate and opportunities for making mistakes...

```python
from pipecat_flows import FlowsFunctionSchema

collect_info_func = FlowsFunctionSchema(
    name="collect_user_info",
    description="Collect basic user information",
    required=["name", "email"],
    handler=process_user_info,
    properties={
        "name": {"type": "string"},
        "email": {"type": "string", "format": "email"}
    },
)
```

#### FlowsDirectFunction

Consolidates the function definition and handler logic into a single function. The function signature and docstring are automatically used to generate the function schema:

```python
async def collect_user_info(
    flow_manager: FlowManager,
    name: str,
    email: str
) -> tuple[FlowResult, NodeConfig]:
    """
    Collect basic user information.

    Args:
        name (str): The user's full name
        email (str): The user's email address
    """
    # Process the information
    flow_manager.state["user_info"] = {"name": name, "email": email}

    # Return result and next node
    return {"status": "success"}, create_next_node()

# Use directly in NodeConfig
node_config = {
    "functions": [collect_user_info]
}
```

#### Provider Native Format

> Uses the provider's native format (OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.). While supported, we recommend using FlowsFunctionSchema for better portability.

Reviewer: 👍 I like how here (and above, with the static flows example), we're cutting down on the time we spend on non-recommended ways of doing things.

> ### Actions

Reviewer: Wait...weren't we talking about actions earlier in this doc? Why did we circle back to it? (A little lost on the structure)

Author: I set this up as:
- Technical overview (all sections)
- Usage (all sections)

Though, the actions examples are trivial, so I'll integrate them into the technical overview section.

#### Built-in Actions

Use built-in actions for common operations:

```python
# End conversation action
"post_actions": [
    {
        "type": "end_conversation",
        "text": "Thank you for your time!"
    }
]

# TTS say action
"pre_actions": [
    {
        "type": "tts_say",
        "text": "Please hold while I process your request..."
    }
]
```

> #### Custom Actions

Reviewer: Also: I had recently renamed "built-in" to "pre-canned" in the reference docs to distinguish between 3 types:
* pre-canned
* function
* custom (to be used rarely)

> #### Custom Actions

Reviewer: > Maybe we even deprecate custom actions in favor of using functions. WDYT? It should be functionally equivalent.

That might be a good idea. Could minimize confusion, for sure. 

They're technically not _completely_ functionally equivalent, as a custom action as the first action in the `post_actions` list would run _immediately_ after the LLM completion whereas a function action in the same position would run after the bot finished speaking.

Regardless, let's revisit this question after this PR.
